# Generics

- One of the most useful and at times most confusing, features in the Java language: generics.
- The type between the <>. 
 
#### Why do we need generics? 
- Imagine if we weren’t specifying the type of our lists and merely hoped the caller didn’t put in something that we didn’t expect. 
- The following does just that:

````java
static void printNames(List list) {
  for (int i = 0; i < list.size(); i++) {
      String name = (String) list.get(i); // ClassCastException: class java.lang.StringBuilder cannot be cast to class java.lang.String
      System.out.println(name);
  }
  
}

public static void main(String[] args) {
    List names = new ArrayList();
    names.add(new StringBuilder("John"));
    printNames(names);
}
````

- Non-generic list can contain anything.
- While using It casts to a String, by assuming that list contains only String
- Generics help us to define what we want inside the list
- Since we specify that we want an ArrayList of String objects, the compiler has enough information to prevent this problem in the first place.

````java

List<String> names = new ArrayList<String>();
names.add(new StringBuilder("Webby")); // DOES NOT COMPILE

````
  
- Getting a compiler error is good. You’ll know right away that something is wrong rather than hoping to discover it later.

#### Advantages of Generics:

__1. Type-safety:__ We can hold only a single type of objects in generics. It does not allow storing other objects.

__2. Individual Type casting is not required:__ There is no need to typecast the object.

__3. Compile-Time Type Checking:__ It is checked at compile time so a problem will not occur at runtime.

__4. Code Reusability:__ we can use generics to create a single class, methods, interface for multiple types. This is essentially using the same piece of code to cater to multiple scenarios without code duplication.

### Create our own Generic Classes

- The syntax for introducing a generic is to declare a formal type parameter in angle brackets.

````java
class EmptyGen<T> {

}
//we can use anything b/w <>
class MyGen<ABC> {}

class PrintGen<E> {
    E element;

    void print(){
        System.out.println(element);
    }
    
    E getElement(){
        return element;
    }
    int compareTo(E obj){
        return 0;
    }
}


````

- The generic type T is available anywhere within the PrintGen class. When you instantiate the class, you tell the compiler what T should be for that particular instance.

#### Naming Conventions for Generics


- A type parameter can be named anything you want. 
- The convention is to use **single uppercase letters** to make it obvious that they aren’t real class names. 
- The following are common letters to use:


    E for an element
    K for a map key
    V for a map value
    N for a number
    T for a generic data type
    S, U, V, and so forth for multiple generic types

- Generic classes aren’t limited to having a single type parameter.

## Type Erasure

- the process of removing the generics syntax from the code is referred as __type erasure__
- Specifying a generic type allows the compiler to enforce proper use of the generic type. 
- For example, specifying the generic type of `PrintGen` as `String` is like replacing the `T` in the `PrintGen` class with `String`. However, this is just for compile time.
- Behind the scenes, the compiler replaces all references to `T` in `PrintGen` with `Object`. 
- In other words, after the code compiles, your generics are just Object types. The `PrintGen` class looks like the following at runtime:

````java
class PrintGen {
    Object element;

    void print(){
        System.out.println(element);
    }
    
    Object getElement(){
        return element;
    }
    int compareTo(Object obj){
        return 0;
    }
}
````

- This means there is only one class file. There aren’t different copies for different parameterized types.
- This process of removing the generics syntax from your code is referred to as __type erasure__. 
- Type erasure allows your code to be compatible with older versions of Java that do not contain generics.
- The compiler adds the relevant casts for your code to work with this type of erased class.
- For example, you type the following:

```java
String str = printGen.getElement();
//The compiler turns it into the following:

String str = (String) printGen.getElement();

```

### Overloading a Generic Method

- Only one of these two methods is allowed in a class because type erasure will reduce both sets of arguments to (List input):

````java
public class LongTailAnimal {
    protected void chew(List<Object> input) {}
    protected void chew(List<Double> input) {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
````

- For the same reason, you also can’t overload a generic method from a parent class.
````java
public class LongTailAnimal {
    protected void chew(List<Object> input) {}
}

public class Anteater extends LongTailAnimal {
    protected void chew(List<Double> input) {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
````

- Both of these examples fail to compile because of type erasure. 
- In the compiled form, the generic type is dropped, and it appears as an invalid overloaded method. 
- Now, let’s look at a subclass:

````java
public class Anteater extends LongTailAnimal {
    protected void chew(List<Object> input) {}
    protected void chew(ArrayList<Double> input) {}
}

````
- The first chew() method compiles because it uses the same generic type in the overridden method as the one defined in the parent class.
- The second chew() method compiles as well. However, it is an overloaded method because one of the method arguments is a List and the other is an ArrayList. 
- When working with generic methods, it’s important to consider the underlying type.

### Returning Generic Types
- When you’re working with overridden methods that return generics, the return values must be covariant. 
- In terms of generics, this means that the return type of the class or interface declared in the overriding method must be a subtype of the class defined in the parent class.
- __Note:__ The generic parameter type must match its parent’s type exactly.
- Given the following declaration for the `Mammal` class, which of the two subclasses, `Monkey` and `Goat`, compile?
````java
public class Mammal {
    public List<CharSequence> play() { ... }
    public CharSequence sleep() { ... }
}
public class Monkey extends Mammal {
    public ArrayList<CharSequence> play() { ... }
}
public class Goat extends Mammal {
    public List<String> play() { ... } // DOES NOT COMPILE
    public String sleep() { ... }
}

````
- The `Monkey` class compiles because `ArrayList` is a subtype of `List`. 
- The play() method in the `Goat` class does not compile. 
- For the return types to be covariant, the generic type parameter must match.
- Even though `String` is a subtype of `CharSequence`, it does not exactly match the generic type defined in the `Mammal` class. 
- Therefore, this is considered an invalid override.
- Notice that the sleep() method in the Goat class does compile since String is a subtype of CharSequence. 
- This example shows that covariance applies to the return type, just not the generic parameter type.

### Implementing Generic Interfaces
- Just like a class, an interface can declare a formal type parameter.
- For example, the following Shippable interface uses a generic type as the argument to its ship() method:

```java
public interface Shippable<T> {
    void ship(T t);
}
```

- There are three ways a class can approach implementing this interface.

__Type-1:__ The first is to specify the generic type in the class. 
- The following concrete class says that it deals only with robots. 
- This lets it declare the ship() method with a Robot parameter: 
````java
class ShippableRobotCrate implements Shippable<Robot> {
    public void ship(Robot t) { }
}
````

__Type-2:__ The next way is to create a generic class. 
- The following concrete class allows the caller to specify the type of the generic:
````java
class ShippableAbstractCrate<U> implements Shippable<U> {
    public void ship(U t) { }
}
````

- In this example, the type parameter could have been named anything, including T. 
- We used U in the example to avoid confusion about what T refers to. 
- The exam won’t mind trying to confuse you by using the same type parameter name.

__Type-3:__ The final way is to not use generics at all. 
- This is the old way of writing code. 
- It generates a compiler warning about Shippable being a raw type, but it does compile. 
- Here the ship() method has an Object parameter since the generic type is not defined:
````java
class ShippableCrate implements Shippable {
    public void ship(Object t) { }
}

````

### What You Can’t Do with Generic Types
There are some limitations on what you can do with a generic type. These aren’t on the
exam, but it will be helpful to refer to this scenario when you are writing practice programs
and run into one of these situations.
Most of the limitations are due to type erasure. Oracle refers to types whose information is
fully available at runtime as reifiable. Reifiable types can do anything that Java allows. Non-reifiable
types have some limitations.
Here are the things that you can’t do with generics (and by “can’t,” we mean without resorting
to contortions like passing in a class object):
■■ Call a constructor: Writing new T() is not allowed because at runtime, it would be
new Object().
■■ Create an array of that generic type: This one is the most annoying, but it makes sense
because you’d be creating an array of Object values.
■■ Call instanceof: This is not allowed because at runtime List<Integer> and
List<String> look the same to Java, thanks to type erasure.
■■ Use a primitive type as a generic type parameter: This isn’t a big deal because you can
use the wrapper class instead. If you want a type of int, just use Integer.
■■ Create a static variable as a generic type parameter: This is not allowed because the
type is linked to the instance of the class.



#### References:
1. https://www.scaler.com/topics/java/generics-in-java/
2. 